♪ Thank you for bein' a friend ♪
♪ Traveled down the road and back again ♪
♪ Your heart is true ♪
♪ You're a pal and a confidante
♪ And if you threw a party ♪
♪ Invited everyone you knew ♪
♪ You would see the biggest gift
Would be from me ♪
♪ And the card attached would say ♪
♪ "Thank you for bein' a friend" ♪
(mellow music playing)
(humming "Jingle Bells")
Hey!
Rose, for a half hour, you've been humming
"Jingle Bells" and yelling "hey."
Why must you do that?
Because it's too hard to hum the "hey."
Oh, boy, it is hell out there.
It must be at least 103,
and the mall was impossible.
Did you get something
for the grandchildren?
Oh, please.
Robbie wants a batman hat.
Six different stores were all sold out.
I found a store where there was one left,
and another woman saw it.
Oh, I cannot believe a person would push
a stranger out of the way,
step on her hand, and elbow her forehead,
just for a batman hat...
but I did it anyway.
I got the hat.
I just have this thing about giving gifts
that are more fun than those
my grandparents gave me.
Ma, do you remember that Christmas
they gave me soap
shaped like the seven dwarfs?
-What's wrong with that?
-What kid wants to play with soap?
After a few baths,
they looked like seven suppositories.
(doorbell rings)
Hi, it's me, Stan.
I brought you a gift.
Oh, why, thank you, Stanley.
Oh, and look, there's a little card.
"Merry Christmas,
Sports Illustrated subscriber."
-You don't have a baseball radio, do you?
-Why are you really here?
I am going to make
all you women wealthy.
How come whenever my ship comes in,
it's leaking?
I am planning on opening
a research and development lab.
We can develop exciting new novelties that
will make today's plastic vomit obsolete.
To make this happen,
I only need $1,000 apiece.
-What do you say?
-(all) No.
Ok. Make it a $100, but no monthly report.
Goodbye, Stanley.
Why don't I wait outside
while you think it over?
Fine, fine.
If he's still here in the morning,
let's give him coffee.
A nightmare. We've been visited
by the yutz of Christmas past.
I'm drained of what little
holiday spirit I had.
We still have to shop
for presents for each other.
I've been giving this some thought.
None of us wants to shop in this heat.
Why don't we put names into a hat,
then we just get a gift
for the person we pick?
There's one problem with your plan.
One of us will get the gift from Rose.
Dorothy, she's right.
You know how hard it is pretending to like
Rose's gifts. Forget it. No way.
Oh, come on, Blanche.
Don't be so childish.
We each stand an equal chance
of having our Christmas ruined.
-I won't mind getting Rose's gift.
-Dorothy's right. Be a good sport.
-(humming "Jingle Bells")
-I have to tell you about Christmas.
It's too hot to shop, stores are mobbed,
there are only two days left,
so we're going to draw names out of a hat.
That way we only have to buy one gift.
But I love shopping,
and I love giving gifts.
And besides, if we draw names,
whose names are they going to be anyway?
The Oak Ridge Boys, Rose.
-Our names.
-Oh!
I'm not sure about this.
When you think about Christmas,
don't you think about giving gifts?
Yes, but that's not the first thing.
I think of Christmas in New York,
the decorations in Macy's window,
the show at Radio City...
skaters on the ice at Mitsubishi center.
On Christmas eve, we went to midnight
mass. Remember, Dorothy?
Oh, sure I do. The music and the candles.
It was beautiful.
The mass was in Latin,
a fine old Italian language.
Now, who knows?
Sometimes it's in English,
sometimes in Spanish. If you ask me,
they should go back to Latin,
the language Jesus spoke.
-Ma, he spoke Hebrew.
-Even in church?
You know, I've been thinking.
Oh, that would explain the beads of sweat.
Maybe Dorothy's right.
I don't need a shopping spree
to give me Christmas spirit.
My church is serving dinner to the poor
hungry people in the neighborhood.
I volunteered to serve.
That'll do the trick for me.
Then let's do it.
Remember, you only buy
for the person whose name you pick.
It doesn't matter who picks you,
because it's bound to be a terrific gift.
Go ahead, Blanche.
-Ok, I buy for... Dorothy.
-Oh, yes! Yes, yes, yes! Oh, yes!
Oh!
Boy, Blanche, I didn't realize
you were such a big spender.
-Go ahead, Dorothy.
-Ok, I buy for... ma!
Yes!
This really was a good idea.
This is really fun.
Oh, shut up, Rose.
-Is it my turn?
-Yeah.
-I buy for... Rose!
-Oh, thank you, God.
No, no, no, Rose,
you can't pick yourself.
Oh, thank goodness.
I'm so hard to shop for.
-Rose, you buy for...
-Blanche.
Ok, thanks, Dorothy.
This really was a good idea.
I don't want to spoil the surprise,
but in a few weeks, someone in this room
will know how to yodel.
(serene music playing)
Your brother Phil, God rest his brain,
gives the worst presents in the world.
What kind of gift is dental floss?
-Well, it's waxed and mint flavored.
-Here, go floss yourself.
-This stinks. I sent him a swell gift.
-What?
A catalogue item.
-L.L. Bean?
-Victoria's secret.
Here's my present
from Kirsten.
She always knows just what
her mother wants.
It's a St. Olaf snowball.
Rose, there's only snow in there.
That's what St. Olaf looks like in winter.
Who's for some fresh-baked
Christmas cookies?
Why are the Christmas cookies in the shape
of American flags and liberty bells?
I couldn't find the Christmas cookie
cutters,
so I used the fourth of July
cookie cutters instead.
I wonder where president Bush stands
on eating the flag?
That's all the presents, except
for the ones we know are fruitcakes.
What about the present
Blanche hid behind the couch?
Oh, my gift for you! I'll get it.
-I want to see the look on your face.
-Me, too.
Here you go, sweetheart.
Why, Rose!
-It's a beautiful blouse!
-I hope it's all right.
Dorothy said you'd like
something crotch less.
I'm due in church in about half an hour.
They start serving dinner at 1:00.
I better get ready.
Rose. Rose, could you use some extra help?
-All the help we can get.
-I'm going with you.
Hey, count me in.
Since I didn't get a gift
I have to bury in the back yard,
I'm feeling Christmassy, too.
-Ma, are you coming?
-But I rented Scarface.
All right, I'll go, too.
I got an idea.
We got all these fruitcakes
from this Christmas, last Christmas,
and the Christmas before that.
Why don't we gather them and--
And what, build a bomb shelter?
No. We can unload them, I mean, bring them
to the church for dessert.
Actually, I think that's very nice.
Like we say in St. Olaf,
Christmas without fruitcake
is like St. Sigmund's day
without the headless boy.
(mellow music playing)
Before we open, I want to thank you
for taking time from your Christmas
to provide Christmas for others.
We're turning away no one, remembering how
Mary and Joseph were turned away.
Reverend Avery, it's always puzzled me,
why didn't Mary and Joseph
call ahead for reservations?
Surely they must have realized
how impossible it is to get a hotel room
during the Christmas season.
I guess that's one for the theologians,
Rose.
I can never get used to serving turkey.
It's un-Sicilian.
-What did you serve?
-Eels.
-Eels?
-Yeah, it's true.
They're a tradition.
After Christmas, it's eel croquettes,
eel hash.
I miss a traditional St. Olaf Christmas.
Do we have time to run out
and get hit by a bus?
First the Christmas pageant
with the shepherds and the angels
and the two wise men.
-Three wise men, Rose.
-Not in St. Olaf.
Then we'd all go down to the town square
and form a circle.
-We'd go home and smoke kippers.
-Why, Rose?
It's the best way to make your house
to smell like kippers.
And then it was traditional to let all the
animals sleep inside that night.
The next morning,
the rumors would start.
They'd continue until new year's,
and we'd make resolutions that it would
never happen again.
But then next year,
all it took was eggnog
and a wise guy saying,
"What the hell? It's Christmas."
All right, volunteers.
Stand by. I'm opening the doors.
Welcome, welcome, everybody.
Merry Christmas.
-I never thought there'd be children.
-I know.
What is Santa Claus doing here?
They pay these poor out-of-work guys
10, 15 bucks
to stand on street corners ringing their
bells for charitable contributions.
A lot of them can't afford a meal.
-Hello there.
-Hello, Santa Claus.
Dorothy, it's me, Stanley.
(calm music playing)
(calm music continues playing)
Stan, what are you doing here?
What happened with the research
and development deal?
I was trying to get some cash
to tide me over.
You were going to cheat us?
Oh, sure, if you want to label everything.
Stan, how could you?
Did you want me to say I'm broke,
I miscalculated the public taste?
I thought I would go through the roof
with my plastic reindeer poop.
That's what happens
when you aim too high.
Then I figured, with the drought
and fire dangers,
the novelty item that would take off
this season
is a little Santa driving a fire engine.
I put every last cent into that hunch.
I ordered 12 gross from my supplier
in Germany.
Everything's getting out of east Berlin
except my fire engines.
-They only got here last night.
-Come on, you've been down before.
That's the nature of your business.
Why don't you go home and enjoy Christmas,
and face the future tomorrow?
-I can't.
-Why not?
-Katherine threw me out.
-Your wife threw you out?
I had no idea she was that bright.
-What happened?
-Katherine accused me of infidelity.
Oh, damn it, Stan.
This makes those infidelities during our
marriage seem much less special.
Why did this have to happen to me?
Broke and homeless on Christmas.
-Why me?
-Why you? Why them?
Look around you.
You're not exactly alone.
This is probably the only Christmas
they'll have.
Think about that. It might take your mind
off your self-pity.
I've got to go back to work.
Mrs. Sensitive.
(serene music playing)
You know, being here reminds me
of my favorite Christmas in 1951,
which I spent at the USO...
making a better Christmas
for our boys getting ready to go to Korea.
I gave those servicemen something even
Mr. Bob Hope himself couldn't give them.
A rash?
Doughnuts, Dorothy.
Big daddy was part owner
of a doughnut shop.
Did you think this would be
a story about sex?
This is a beautiful Christmas story.
That really hurts me.
I'm sorry, Blanche.
Well, anyway, after the boys
had their doughnut,
actually, at this point, it does change
more into a veteran's day story.
What happened to Dorothy's ex-husband
is not that uncommon.
-Really?
-Many people are only a few paychecks away
from being homeless.
The suddenly poor are everywhere.
Once knocked down, it's hard to recover.
-What's going to happen to these people?
-I don't know.
Housing isn't affordable,
rents keep going up,
-minimum wage has been held down.
-Seems so unfair.
It is. There are 3 million homeless
people in this country.
They're being fed today
because it's Christmas,
but where do they eat tomorrow?
When the great communicator
talked about a city on a hill,
I wonder if it included
people sleeping on gratings.
Dorothy, Stan's out there
feeling so sorry for himself,
he's bringing down the homeless.
-Blanche, take over for me.
-What are you going to do?
-Try to make Stan feel like a whole man.
-Anything you need?
Yes. Half a man.
Sophia, you were just putting me on
about those eels, right?
In Sicily it wouldn't be Christmas
without a plate of eels and larks.
Larks? Larks aren't eating birds.
They're singing birds.
They don't sing long in Sicily.
-Stanley?
-Yeah?
I forgot to wish you a Merry Christmas.
-Some Christmas.
-Oh, come on, Stanley.
-You're the most fortunate person here.
-Big deal.
You've always been able to turn
bad holidays around.
Do you remember the Christmas
we were so broke
that you convinced the kids Christmas
was the 26th?
You got somebody's Christmas tree
from the garbage.
You trimmed it with gum wrappers
and pull tabs.
On television they were playing
Jim Thorpe, all-American.
-You told the kids it was King of Kings.
-They believed it, too.
Right up to the part where Jesus had his
Olympic medals taken away
for playing professional baseball.
-That became a tradition with us.
-You had ingenuity then.
You didn't let anything beat you.
You can do it again, Stan,
if you just work hard
and turn on that Zbornak charm.
-I'm good at that.
-You could charm the pants off anybody.
I have to believe that.
Otherwise, I was... easy.
It's different this time.
I've scraped the bottom
of the barrel before.
-Now I don't even have a barrel.
-Stan, stop whining. It's pathetic.
That's the only way to whine.
All I need is a few bucks,
just a little seed money.
Here, Stan. Take it.
Atta girl. To show I love you,
I won't count it.
I hate you, Stanley. You are the lowest.
I'm sorry if I'm not the man
you divorced.
-So am I.
-I'd love to be belittled, but--
Fine, fine. You've eaten.
Go somewhere else and wallow.
-Careful. You're not my only ex-wife.
-Then why bother me?
You're the only one who answers the door.
(serene music playing)
♪ Fa, la, la, la, la ♪
♪ La, la, la, la ♪
That does it. All the food's gone.
Except the fruitcake,
there's more now than when we started.
I wish there was more
we could do for them.
-Especially the children.
-I know.
I'm supposed to look after
their spiritual needs,
but they have other needs
that are more pressing.
Thank you for coming.
I wish you every blessing for next year.
Merry Christmas! Ho ho ho!
Here's Santa with toys
for all the good boys and girls.
Have you all been good boys and girls?
-(kids) Yeah!
-Aha!
Ho ho ho!
Ho ho ho ho ho!
-I'm proud of you, Stan. I'm proud.
-That was lovely.
You made me believe
in Santa Claus again.
-Me, too.
-Not me. I knew it was Stan all along.
After walking out of here,
I realized I'm more fortunate than many.
Tomorrow, I'm going
to get the jump on Easter.
I've got an idea for a great novelty,
an Easter egg with a window.
-Inside's a beautiful Easter scene.
-That's not a new idea.
Those Easter eggs
have been around for years.
Yes, but this leaves
a black circle around your eyes.
That practically screams Easter.
And, you know, Dorothy,
I apologized to my wife.
She's letting me come back.
Great. Then you can give me
back the $60.
-Well, I apologized with flowers.
-$60 worth?
Dorothy, I may be a lot of things,
but I'm not cheap.
Actually, this is one
of the best Christmases
-I've ever spent with Stan.
-It was pretty nice.
I can't remember feeling this proud
of myself so early in the evening.
-We did good.
-I wish we could do more.
So do I.
We have a place to go home to. Many don't.
We should keep them
in our hearts and minds,
not just on Christmas,
but every day of the year.
It's more than a place to go.
It's having someone there for you.
-We have each other.
-That's right, darling.
So let's go home.
Thanks, girls,
for coming down and helping out.
-Thanks for having us.
-I'm glad you asked.
And, hey, merry Christmas.
-Oh, merry Christmas.
-Merry Christmas.
(theme music playing)